Episode: How Big Things (Should) Get Done (Cleaning Up, Ep128)
Show: Cleaning Up
Guest: Bent Flyvbjerg, Emeritus Professor at the University of Oxford and Professor at the IT University of Copenhagen; author of How Big Things Get Done
Host: Michael Liebreich
Region: Denmark
URL: https://www.cleaningup.live/ep128-prof-bent-flyvbjerg-how-big-things-should-get-done/
Transcript source: publisher (full transcript published on the episode page). Speaker labels expanded to full names for readability; the words are unchanged.

WHAT WILL BE ASSESSED
This is a long interview, so this file holds only the assigned stretch near the start,
from Michael Liebreich asking Flyvbjerg to put numbers on the problem, to Flyvbjerg
finishing his answer on "Think Slow, Act Fast." Focus on four things. First, the Iron
Law: only about 9 percent of projects come in on budget and on schedule, and only about
half of one percent hit budget, schedule and the promised benefits, drawn from a
database of more than 16,000 projects, plus his point about fat tails and black swans.
Second, the two root causes he names: one about psychology (optimism and other biases)
and one about power (people who deliberately lowball cost and time and overstate
benefits to win funding, what he calls the beauty contest). Third, his fix for the
psychology side, which he calls de-biasing, including reference class forecasting, and
his line that your biggest risk is you. Fourth, what he means by "Think Slow, Act Fast"
and why acting fast shrinks the window for bad things. In the middle he compares nuclear
and solar; that is only an example, so you can pass over the energy details.

RANGE USED. The full episode runs a little over an hour, roughly 65 minutes. This file
contains only the section assigned to learners: about the first 20 minutes of the
interview, after the introductions.

The publisher transcript carries no timecodes, so any minute figures are estimated from
position and may be off by a few minutes. Use the spoken lines as the real markers.

  Start: Michael Liebreich, "And I've read the book, I read bits of it early..."
         (his request that Flyvbjerg put metrics on the problem)
  End:   Bent Flyvbjerg, "...think slow, act fast. And only if you do that, will you
         be successful."

Everything below is the publisher text for that section, unedited.

---

Michael Liebreich: And I've read the book, I read bits of it early, and then in preparation for this conversation, and I can vouch for the fact that it's extremely readable; there's lots of anecdotes, lots of stories. But also, a structure and a thesis. Can you start us off by saying, how big is the problem of projects, big things, not getting done properly? Can you put some metrics on... What would the world look like if we actually could do this stuff properly - if we all read the book and all followed its lessons? What would we save, or what would happen?

Bent Flyvbjerg: Well, to put numbers on the problem, we do that in the book, and we actually have a name for it, we call it the Iron Law of project management. And the Iron Law basically says, over budget, over time under-benefits over and over again. And that's a law documented by hard statistics, and we see that only around 9% of projects are on budget and on schedule. So, 9%, meaning that over 90% are not on budget and not on schedule. And now, if you add on benefits, then it's half a percent; that's half of 1% are budget, on time, and deliver the promised benefits. And that's a dismal statistic. This is based on the biggest database of its kind, with 16,000+ projects in it. At first, when he saw these numbers, we had a rather smaller database - just a few hundred projects, 258 to be precise - which was the world's largest database at the time. We had the same result, basically, but we thought it could be an artifact of the small sample. So, we started sampling more. So, we collected data for a few hundred more projects - still the same result. Then we collected data for a thousand more projects, still the same result. And now we have 16,000+, still the same result. So, it's a very robust number. And now, in the meantime, other colleagues have started to do research on the same thing as we do, so you don't have to trust us only - you can also look to our colleagues and they find similar numbers. So, we consider it a pretty firm result, a pretty firm finding, that projects are actually performing dismally; not only badly, but dismally. And on top of that, we have this thing about fat tails, you know, black swans; it's not only that they perform badly, but at large percentage of the majority of project types perform extremely badly, with huge blowouts; not just somewhat over budget, but a total blowout of hundreds and hundreds of percent over budget, and the same with their schedule and benefits. So, the situation is grim, that's the only way to describe it. Luckily, a lot of people are now interested in improving the situation.

Michael Liebreich: So, let me give you two personal touch points. As I was reading the book, there were two things that really appealed to me. You talked about, actually, both of them in that comment. One is the reliance on statistics. Now, you may not know how New Energy Finance, the company that I started that I then sold to Mike Bloomberg, that is now Bloomberg New Energy Finance, the leading information provider globally on the net-zero transition... I'm just a senior author, I just write some pieces now. But that started because I wanted data: who's investing in wind, who's investing in solar, who's investing in fuel cells, all those sorts of things. And there was no good data, you couldn't do a trend analysis, you couldn't really grasp the problem without that data; how much money were we investing...? So I started by building databases, so that resonates with me... What you must have done is starting there, and opening up the spreadsheet and start putting structuring the data. The second touch point for me was I was on the board of Transport for London. And you may have... I'm sure you're familiar with what happened to Crossrail. So, I was on the board of Transport for London, I was on the Finance Committee, when the extent to which it was off-track was concealed from us. I was also on the board during our famous Garden Bridge adventure, when then-Mayor Boris wanted to build this garden bridge and the costs exploded and exploded, and almost looked like a chapter out of your book. So, it was very personal for me reading your book and thank you very much for both of those: building a dataset, and awakening these raw memories for me. Let's come back to that statistic though. It's one in 200 projects that is on time, on budget and delivers the projected benefits. One in 200, half a percent. Why is that?

Bent Flyvbjerg: Well, that's one of the things that I've explored thoroughly in my research and that we describe in the book. And there's two levels that you can look at it, what we call causes and root causes. When people talk about causes, they typically will talk about, you know... it's just difficult to do projects, and they're complex, and in many projects, you have to do construction. And as soon as you start doing construction, you find things in the ground that you didn't expect, or the weather is bad, or whatever, you know. So, these are what we call causes. We find that underneath those causes, there are what we call root causes; it goes much deeper than these surface phenomena. And we say the root causes are two, and they're related to psychology. So, our human psychology is one root cause, the way our brains work. The second is power. And that's about how we jockey for position, and for funds and so on. Also, as human beings, it's more a social aspect than a psychological aspect. And if we take psychology first, it is very well-documented in behavioral science, behavioral economics - by giants like Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky and Richard Thaler at Chicago, and so on - that the human brain is biased, we have cognitive biases. The most prominent is probably optimism. So, we are all optimists, and you can see what happens with a budget if it's optimistic. Well, an optimistic budget is low, and then you will have a cost overrun, just as surely as the law of gravity works. I mean, if you're optimistic about a budget, it's going to be low, and you're going to have an overrun on that budget, on average. So, the same with a schedule: if you're optimistic about the schedule, you'll have a schedule overrun; if you're optimistic about the benefits, you won't have as many benefits as you thought you would have. So, that's just optimism, and cognitive sciences have documented over 200 biases to date, you know, and it's still increasing; new biases are being discovered all the time. So, other biases are the planning fallacy, overconfidence, bias and the ease of retrieval, and many others. And this means that the decisions that we make are actually not that good, the citizens are biased. And the solution to that, if you want to get beyond that, you need to de-bias, and that we also describe in the book. We've actually developed methods for de-biasing, including a method called reference class forecasting. But it actually doesn't matter much which method it is; the important thing is that you take de-biasing seriously, and you realize... So this is the first thing I teach decision-makers is: you're biased. Because you're biased, your biggest risk is you. The biggest risks are not out there in the world - even though they're also out there - but that's not the biggest risk, the biggest risk is the way we perceive the risks. Once we have processed the risk through our brain, they come out optimistic, they come out misunderstanding what the base rates are, the odds that we're playing, and so on. And in order to avoid that we need to de-bias things. So, that's the psychology side, and that's the root cause there. On the power side, it's similar, but it's deliberate. So, the psychology is not deliberate, this is something we do unconsciously; we actually don't think about it, mostly, when we optimistic, we are just optimistic. And we have all have had this experience: oh shit, I did it again, you know, I was optimistic again, I thought I would be at my destination at this hour, but look, now I'm 15 minutes late, again. So, this is something that's familiar to all of us in our behavior. The power thing is deliberate, it's very different. The result is the same, but it's deliberate. So, if you and I wanted to make our project look good on paper, that's easy, and in some situations, you want to do that because you're in competition with other projects for limited funding. So, how do you deal with that? You make your project attractive on paper. How do you make your project look good for the beauty contest, that is project selection? Well, you underestimate the cost so your project looks cheaper. Who doesn't like a cheap project? You underestimate the schedule so it looks like you can do the project faster. Who doesn't want their project fast? And you make the project look good by overestimating the benefits: this product is going to deliver a lot more nice and good things than will actually happen - and we know that - but we put it in the in the proposal. So, now we have a fantastic proposal for the beauty contest, and we have a higher likelihood of winning the beauty contest, that it's our project that gets funding, and we did it deliberately. And just as sure, again, as the law of gravity works, if we did all these things, we're going to have cost overruns, schedule overruns and benefit shortfalls, right? And this is exactly the same as on the psychology side. So, these two root causes reinforce each other; they create a double whammy of cost overruns, schedule overruns and benefits shortfalls with these two drivers.

Michael Liebreich: And if anybody who is listening or watching this hasn't figured it out yet... the reason that this is all about the climate is because you found in your book, you looked at some of the worst projects - in terms of being on time on budget and delivering benefits - are nuclear, and some of the best ones, the best category, is actually solar. So, it's very relevant for the climate change challenge, is it not?

Bent Flyvbjerg: Absolutely, and I would say climate projects are probably the most interesting type of projects, of the 25 different types of projects that we look at. It's super interesting, and strange in the way that they completely polarize; at one end, you have the worst performing projects, which will be nuclear, like you said, but also hydroelectric power, so big dams, is the other energy project. And that's kind sad, you know, and a problem, because both nuclear and hydroelectric power, are carbon-free, right, more or less? So it would be really great if they performed well, and could be done fast, but instead, they have huge cost overruns, and they have huge delays, they take a long time to do, and they become very, very expensive. But all is not lost, because at the very opposite end of the scale, we have solar, as the best performing product type of not only energy projects - of any type of projects that we've ever looked at, solar is the best performing, meaning the smallest cost overruns; 1%, it's nothing, it's basically on budget on average, and being built very quickly on time, on budget. And cheaper and cheaper, you know, so it's getting cheaper and cheaper. The same for wind power; not quite as good but very, very good compared to other project types, wind power. Batteries, same thing. And the explanation is - which is something that we've looked into in depth, not only for energy projects, but for all projects - the explanation is that solar, wind, batteries are born modular, they're completely modular. So it's obvious for solar panels, right? The solar cell is the basic module, or the Lego as we call it. Basic module, you put enough solar cells on the panel, well, then you have a solar panel. You put enough panels together, you have an array. You put enough arrays out there, you have a solar farm. That's it, you know, it's just one module builds the next, which builds the next, which builds the next. And if you don't have enough in one farm, you just build more farms. So, this is what we call scale-free scalability. You can scale this at any scale, you can scale it up, you can scale it down; it's really easy, it's really cheap, and it's really fast. Wind, same thing. A wind turbine consists of four Legos: the first Lego is the foundation, the second Lego is the tower, the third Lego is the nacelle, with the turbine, and the third Lego is the wings, or the blades, that you put on the nacelle. Click, click, click, and you have a turbine. And literally, it used to take months to construct, on a construction site, wind turbines; now it's done in one day, because they are not constructed anymore, they are manufactured, in factories, and then you just bring them on to the assembly side and you assemble them. So, it's become incredibly efficient, and that's actually our luck in the situation that we're in now, same with batteries. We are so lucky that there are energy technologies that we can really scale up at enormous speeds and to enormous scale, which is exactly what we need now, in order to meet the climate goals for 2030 and 2050. We don't have time to mess around anymore; we don't have time to mess around with nuclear. I wish... I'm not anti-nuclear by any means. Some people think that sometimes, because I point out the numbers look bad for nuclear, then people say he must be against nuclear. Now if that isn't a dumb argument, I never saw one you know? It's about the numbers. I'm an economic geographer, I look at the economics, and the economics for nuclear are dismal. It's really bad, and I wish they were better, and I hope that small modular reactors might solve that eventually. But I wouldn't be holding my breath, because we don't even have a prototype yet. But the situation for energy in general is this interesting polarization, of really badly performing projects and really well performing projects.

Michael Liebreich: Let's do this because... Rather than make it all about nuclear - and of course, there's going to be a subtext, because these nuclear power stations, and waste storage, they are big things, there's a clue in the book - How Big Things Get Done. Although, as you point out big solar, big wind, big batteries, giga-factories, and so on are also big things. But I don't want to make it just about nuclear. I actually want to try and extract.... because in your book, you've got a number of heuristics, and I think we would do well to spend a bit of time on some of the other heuristics, because they are relevant. And then maybe we can come and look at a range of different net-zero technologies, and see whether they are likely to be at the bottom end of the scale, or at the top end, the high performing or the low performing. You've got one heuristic, which you started the book with, which you call "Think Slow, Act Fast." What do you mean by that?

Bent Flyvbjerg: Yeah, so "Think Slow" means deliberating. So, you need to sit back and deliberate about what you're doing. So, one of our cognitive biases is availability bias. Our brains have a tendency to just grab the first idea that comes up and run with it. And there's probably good evolutionary reasons for that, that we needed to be able to act fast when somebody popped up in our brain. And so that's a pattern we have, and again, it's very well-documented by behavioral science. And this is the characteristic of thinking fast, you just quickly grab an idea. And this is actually why Daniel Kahneman's book is called Thinking, Fast and Slow, that's his famous bestseller where he summarizes his work, called Thinking, Fast and Slow. So thinking fast, when we talk about, is a nod to Daniel Kahneman; yes, this is the way to do it, he is right. This is his argument in his book, that we need to think, slow and not fast, because when we think fast, we make lots of errors. It's good... I mean, when you meet a lion on the savanna, and the lion is trying to eat you, it's very good to think fast and run fast, you don't want to sit down and deliberate: what do I do in this situation? So, that's why we have these things from an evolutionary point of view. But I'm sure that anyone can see that it's not all decisions that you can use that decision-making process on, and that's what Kahneman argues. So, we agree with him: thinking fast is not a good idea for billion-dollar projects, or any important project that you do in your life - it might be your wedding, or buying a new home, or the kitchen renovation that we talk about in the book. All of these things, you actually need to think slow - which doesn't mean taking a long time. It just means taking sufficient time, adequate time, to think through what it is that you're doing. And because, if you do that, then you're able to act fast. And that's the second thing that Kahneman doesn't talk about, but that we talk about, because we are about doing projects, so acting is absolutely crucial to what we do. And we are saying the preparation for acting fast is thinking slow, and only if you thought slowly, will you be able to act fast, and acting fast is extremely important to reduce your risks. The longer you take to do something, the more you expose yourself to risk, including black swan risks. So, we look at that exposure as a window, a window in time, and by acting fast, you make that window smaller, you shorten the time it takes to deliver your project. And by making that window small, fewer bad things can fly through the window, including big fat black swans; they can't get through the window if you make it small, and therefore you have a bigger chance of being successful with your project. So, that's what we called the rhythm of a successful project, is: think slow, act fast. And only if you do that, will you be successful.
