Episode: Unlocking the Secret Power of Groups with Colin Fisher
Show: The Remarkable Leadership Podcast (The Kevin Eikenberry Group)
Guest: Dr. Colin M. Fisher, Associate Professor of Organizations and Innovation at University College London School of Management, former professional jazz trumpeter, author of "The Collective Edge: Unlocking the Secret Power of Groups"
Host: Kevin Eikenberry
Region: United Kingdom
URL: https://remarkablepodcast.com/unlocking-the-secret-power-of-groups-with-colin-fisher/
Transcript source: publisher (full transcript published on the episode page)

WHAT WILL BE ASSESSED
This transcript has timestamps, so you can go straight to what is assessed. The marked
stretch runs from about 06:06, where he gives the big idea, to about 30:41, the end of
the section on competition. Three questions draw from it. First, what he means by process
losses, with the examples he gives of groups coming in under the sum of their parts, and
the conditions under which groups do beat individuals. Second, his rule about meeting size
and why he says inviting people to be included backfires. Third, why he says competition
inside a team is hard to make healthy. You can skip the intro, the remote and hybrid
section after 30:41, and the closing about his hobbies and reading.

RANGE USED. The full episode runs about 42 minutes. This file contains only the marked
section assigned to learners, roughly 25 minutes, from 00:06:06 to 00:30:41. The timecodes
below are the publisher's own.

  Start: Kevin Eikenberry [00:06:06], "Leading us all the way to the book, The Collective
         Edge... the big idea of the book."
  End:   Colin Fisher [00:30:12], "...the more you can get us focused on being a better
         version of ourselves, the better the better off you're going to be."

Everything below is the publisher text for that section, unedited.

---

[00:06:06] Kevin Eikenberry: Leading us all the way to the book, The Collective Edge. What's what would you say. Calling is the big idea of the book.

[00:06:14] Colin Fisher: The big idea is we need groups. They're all around us. We group dynamics are influencing every part of our lives. Even when there's no group, they're there in our heads affecting what we say and what we do. But we ignore them and that we're just kind of pushed around by group dynamics, kind of like it's this invisible wind. And we focus a lot on how to change ourselves. We sometimes, you know, if you're in the business world, you may see a lot of books on strategy for your whole organization, but we kind of skip over this group level. We don't think nearly as much about how do we get the most out of our groups and teams. What's so special about them and why they're different than managing individuals or managing whole organizations?

[00:07:05] Kevin Eikenberry: So I have a question that I don't know. Maybe no one's asked you this or I don't know. Yeah. I'm curious because most books, written about this kind of thing. If if there's a word in the subtitle of the word in the subtitle is going to be team or teams, and you use the word groups. So how are they the same or different, and why did you choose groups rather than teams.

[00:07:30] Colin Fisher: So I think teams, you know, are the groups group, right. The kind of like platonic ideal of the most group thing you can be where you have these, you know, small sets of interdependent people working together towards a collective goal. That and so teams, you know, I do think have a very specific meaning. And they are, like I said, the sort of best kind of group to be in if what you want is to get work done. But what I wanted to tell the story of wasn't just the story of real teams, which I think people usually associate with work teams or with, you know, sports teams or things like that. But I also wanted to tell the story of how group dynamics is affecting your life at home. How it's helping us to understand politics and what's going on at the highest levels of government, how it's affecting basically almost everything. And so I am, you know, primarily I, I am a researcher who studies teams for the most part. But I wanted to kind of bring the science of teams and take it just out of the kind of boardrooms and, and, you know, project management world and to kind of bring it in, bring it to everyone else as well. So I, I did choose that on purpose. And I think that's a that's a great first question. And I have not been asked that.

[00:08:58] Kevin Eikenberry: So I will say, that you and I talked about before we, before we hit record, before we went live, that there's a specific chapter about polarization that I think we could have the whole conversation about here. And it's one of the things I try to find or usually it finds me in every book I read or every one of these conversations I have the thing that will stick with me, and it's that chapter that will probably stick with me the most. And the reason I'm saying that now is, is obviously to complement you. But beyond that, to say, I don't know, for all of you who are listening that will even get there in this conversation, because we do need to get at the Timi ness stuff, that high end of the group ness stuff, as you mentioned. And and so we may not get there, but there are great things in this book that do go beyond, maybe the the tactical or even strategic that we need to be thinking about, as relates to the show. So that's where we're going to go. But I do think there's one of the thing we need to do before we go start to dive in. And that is and you talk about this at some length, especially in Western culture, you know, we have this belief that, there are these lone geniuses that they are they magically make things happen out of air. And that certainly is true, is far less true than we believe it to be. So, like, let's talk about what you call I think you call it the lone genius myth. Talk about that just a little bit. Because if we're going to if we're going to be effective as leaders of teams and groups, we need to be clear about this ourselves and help our teams with it as well.

[00:10:36] Colin Fisher: Yeah. So the myth of the lone genius is this idea that we when we look back at history and we try and explain it, we tend to focus on these great individuals, you know, that we're we're trying to tell the story of Steve Jobs or of Einstein or of, you know, whatever. Pick the sort of lone genius that that you look up to the most. And there's good reasons, if we understand our own psychology, that we want to do that first, it's easier for us to relate to it, right? That we we live our lives as individuals. And so it's easy for us to kind of relate to a story that's about someone else who's experiencing the world as an individual, but it's also because of what psychologists call the fundamental attribution error, which and that's called fundamental because this is at the basis of so many of the cognitive mistakes that we make, and that what we do is when we're trying to explain why someone else does something, we tend to use their traits, their personality, things about them as an individual to understand. And, you know, why were you late? You know, why did you say that thing I found, you know, vaguely insulting? Well, you know, it must be because, you know, you're lazy or you're you're rude and that those are the kinds of explanations that especially when we're not thinking very hard that we use and we systematically underweight the situation and the context that that these things are happening in. And that part of that, for whatever reason, we look at groups as a big part of that context. And so, you know, in the book, I kind of peel back some of these lone genius myths. I look at the discovery of of the double helix structure of DNA. I talk about Thomas Edison and we sort of, you know, peel back the layers and whatever story you pick when you peel back those layers, you're going to find a great group right behind that, you know, seemingly lone genius. And so I think if we're trying to manage for, you know, people to do great things, then we need to understand that it's those great groups we're trying to create. We're not just trying to find the next genius. That's not really how these things happen, and that there's a lot of great data that shows that, on average, that these sort of lone geniuses, that individual discoveries, individual businesses, individual patents, those are happening less and less, and they're less and less impactful that in today's world, groups and teams are the ones who are disproportionately making all the big discoveries, starting all the great businesses, making the changes in the world that we want to see. So I think it's really important to unpack that.

[00:13:19] Kevin Eikenberry: Yeah, there's some really cool examples in the book about all that. I think along with some of the stuff that, that I said that I will take from this book around polarization and understanding it better. The other I think big thing for me was the stuff around synergy. So I'd like to talk about the science of synergy a little bit, because as you note in the book, you know, a lot of times people like you and I will use that word. And others, I think, sometimes kind of roll their eyes about that. And so let's talk about the science underneath that sort of very cool, trendy and maybe cliche word synergy.

[00:14:00] Colin Fisher: It's I really thought long and hard about like, do I want to use this word because I do think it's got, you know, it's almost of the like most cliche business buzzword you could use on some level, right? Like in, in a movie, if they're trying to make fun of business people, they're probably going to have them talking about synergy or something. But, you know, when you study groups, synergy is real. And it's it's sort of the, the, you know, magic sauce that we're looking for all the time if we just, you know, split everybody up and we have the team and instead of having them work together, everyone was working alone as an individual group and we add up what they did. Is that going to, you know, be more or less than if we had them work as a, as a real team. And that's a that's always the question because that's a real question if you're a manager. Right. Should I really split people up or should I have them work together and that for years it proved to be really hard to find that we, you know, when researchers were studying this, they kept finding that groups underperformed that bar that when you bring people together, they're less than the sum of their parts, literally that if you just have them split up and do things individually and added that all together, whether they were, you know, pulling a rope or cheering or, you know, stuffing envelopes or even brainstorming, coming up with ideas, we keep finding what researchers called process losses that they were literally less than the sum of their parts. But that doesn't need to be the case in the science of synergy has told us that they're we can predict the times that it's most likely where groups are going to be more than the sum of their parts. And so that's really where I think this, the science has done, is made more sophisticated comparisons between individual performance, group performance and the sort of, you know, hypothetical. What would the best individuals do? What you know, with the fastest individuals do, what would the most efficient individuals do? And how does a group compared to those things? And I think that's where we've seen a lot breakthroughs.

[00:16:13] Kevin Eikenberry: So anyone who's listening now says, okay, what are some of those times? So give us a couple things to help us as leaders. Understand, recognize, be aware of those moments when the process gains outpace the process losses.

[00:16:32] Colin Fisher: So that the times when synergy is most likely are when things are complex. So that's the the number one predictor is when you give teams a complex task, they have a lot better chance of outperforming individuals, than than they do. They have a lot better chance of outperforming the best individual. The fastest individual, all these things. And by complex, I simply mean there's, you know, too much for individuals to keep track of that when there is, you know, 18 different choices and 18 different contingencies and a whole bunch of rules. But then groups are going to tend to perform better than individuals, but that it's beyond that and that a lot of these important tasks, you know, whether it's starting a business, whether it's, you know, engineering some new product, they require more expertise and more diverse expertise than any one person has, and that there's a lot of these tasks, like playing in a jazz ensemble where you literally couldn't do it alone. Right? There's no there's no way, like, I.

[00:17:38] Kevin Eikenberry: Can't play the saxophone and the trumpet at the same.

[00:17:41] Colin Fisher: Time. Right? That's right. You can't play the trumpet and the saxophone. So we need this whole band. And that's again an opportunity for synergy. But moreover, if we kind of take that metaphor further, we tend not to like bands that are all the same instrument. The chances that your favorite band is a saxophone ensemble of six saxophone players is quite low. I mean, there's some great ones. Don't get me wrong, my friends, if any of my saxophone ensemble friends are watching, no offense, but they're, you know, we we like that diversity of skills in our groups in the same true work that when we set teams up where not everybody knows the same stuff, not everybody's bringing the same skills to the table. That's when we have a chance of synergy. And so we're giving them complicated work stuff that, you know, hopefully no one knows the answer to already, and that this kind of is the flip side of that, right? The, the the time where you have the worst chance of synergy is where we already know how to do the task really, really well, that we could do it as individuals. You know, we don't need to to have a group here. I could go home and I could do it on my own and that it's got this kind of repetitive quality where the process is really prescribed for us. So somebody else has told us, you've got to do step one, step two, step three, step four, step five. You can't deviate from that. And those tend to be things that groups don't have a great chance of synergy at.

[00:19:12] Kevin Eikenberry: And yet everyone who's listening will say, well, we've done that. And sometimes we do that in the name of inclusion, or in the name of we think it's going to create engagement. It's one of the reasons why we end up with meetings that have way more people in them than we need to have in them, and we could you and I know you and I could go way down that path. I want to I want to ask you, everyone who's listening is. And I said it in the open is on teams leads teams has lots of team experience, some good, some not so good. What is it, would you say, from the breadth of your research, what is the thing that people most often get wrong about teams?

[00:19:57] Colin Fisher: Oh, boy, there's so many things. So. Well, give us a couple.

[00:20:01] Kevin Eikenberry: I know, I know, I hate it when people ask me what I call the desert island question. Yeah, I can go to the desert island. I don't get only take one album with me. I know which one you take because I read the book. But fundamentally, I know getting it to one is hard. But but what are a couple of the big ones that have a huge impact on our success?

[00:20:21] Colin Fisher: Yeah, I mean, I think you were alluding to one of the biggest ones right there, which is this kind of groups as a vehicle for, you know, including everybody in, you know, a decision or feeling like we don't want to leave people out of these meetings because you know, that they would feel bad, but instead that we just group meetings shouldn't have more than about seven people in them. And they just.

[00:20:55] Kevin Eikenberry: Say that, again, everyone needs to know this. I mean, and you may know it, but you don't do it. Say that.

[00:21:00] Colin Fisher: Right. So group meetings shouldn't have more than seven people in them, that if you've got more than seven people, your chances of everybody feeling heard, everybody feeling like they're contributing, even if you invited them because you wanted to include them, the chances that they're going to feel that way are really, really low. That we know if we enter a room and there's 20 people sitting around a table and we've got an hour long meeting, you know, you know, you're not going to be heard. You know, you're not going to really have a real discussion where we, you know, come to new ideas that that's just it's not possible that some people are just going to sit there and be silent and not say anything, or it's going to be trivial and that, you know, the research really bears this one out. And I would say this is where I get into the most combative, not combative, but I think every yeah, everybody like when I tell, you know, managers this, it's not that people don't believe it. It's just they don't know what to do with that because it seems so impossible to then go, wait a minute, I'm supposed to only have meetings with, you know, 3 to 7 people in them all the time and that, you know, these kind of all hands meetings where I've got 20 or 30 people, I'm supposed to just like, not do those and tell people not to come. And the answer is, yeah, that that's exactly what you're supposed to do.

[00:22:22] Kevin Eikenberry: Think about how much. Listen, everybody think about how much time, bad word I spent, man. Hours. You get back in your organization. If you simply did that one thing. You're welcome. Everybody. Because that is massive. And even when we had our leader head on, it was. I don't know how to do that. We've all been in those meetings with our leader hat not on. And we know it. Colin is exactly right. Right.

[00:22:50] Colin Fisher: Yeah. It's it's so tough. Yeah.

[00:22:53] Kevin Eikenberry: I absolutely I know it's tough. So so let's talk about launching teams because everyone who's watching or listening it is or will have the opportunity to launch a new team, a project team or whatever, or building a brand new team, whatever. What are a couple of things that we should be doing and maybe things we don't know we should be doing when we're launching or forming teams so they can be more effective more quickly.

[00:23:24] Colin Fisher: The most important thing is something I hope you know you should do, even if you you forget, which is to be clear about what the goal of this team is. Why did we get these people together? What are we supposed to achieve? Where are we? Good. Yeah, where are we trying to get to? And that too often where I think people make a mistake is they assume that everybody knows why they were invited. They assume that it's like, oh, you know, it's like you, you must have, you know, read all the materials or you heard from somebody else or somebody else told you. And so we can just get right to work. So right at the beginning and even before the beginning, right when you're sending out the materials for the meeting, when you're whatever communication there is, you're saying, here's, you know, here's what we're trying to achieve, here's where we're trying to get to. Here's why it's important. You know, the this is important to us as an organization. It's important to the world to do. It's important to, you know, me personally. And then the third thing, and this is where I think people skip it, is why is this going to be challenging? And this gets back to what we were just talking about with when, when should you even have a group that has a chance of synergy in this? When we're doing something complicated, something challenging that's going to require us to really use the full complement of our knowledge, skills and effort. And if we don't feel like it's going to be challenging, that's when you get people who are going to be disengaged. And and, you know, we kind of check out. So, you know, these are the kind of three buckets your, your three, three. Checkmarks you're trying to hit when you're articulating the goal that it's clear what it is, it's clear why it's important. And you're articulating what's going to be challenging about it and why we're going to need a team to do it. So I think that's the the one that I think hopefully you kind of know that. And, but that it gets forgotten too often.

[00:25:26] Kevin Eikenberry: And you said the right word. We assume the leader thinks, well, surely everyone knows this. Just because you said it in your head 60 times, does that mean you've even said it out loud once, let alone enough times for people to get it? Without questions? There's there's so much Colin that we could talk about. I really I want to talk a little bit about competition because and this might be an area that, the reason I want to talk about is because I found myself nodding in agreement with you, throughout that section. But let's talk about competition, because we seem to have a bit of a love hate tension about it, like, well, yeah, we sort of know competition can be good, but like, we've all seen where competition causes problems on a team. So how do we keep or make competition healthy for our teams and groups? Yeah.

[00:26:19] Colin Fisher: That's a it's a great question because competition is one of the most powerful motivators that we know about. If you want people to be, you know, work really, really hard putting them in a competition where they think they have a chance to win, that's going to work. Now, the the problem, it's going to if what we want is for people to work hard, but that working hard isn't always the same thing is healthy. And so I, I like the way that you phrase that here is making competition healthy. And that there there's a couple of things that we might get confused about. One is competition within the team is very difficult to to make healthy, that when you have members that are competing against one another for rewards, for promotions, for just the, you know, goodwill of the boss, the that may motivate individuals, but it's going to make it less likely that when they need to help each other, they need to support each other. They need to be teaching one another things that it's making it less likely that they're going to do it, and the.

[00:27:29] Kevin Eikenberry: Process losses are going to grow here to to.

[00:27:31] Colin Fisher: Go back. That's what your canvas. That's right. And that, you know, that you that although, you know, we we all kind of idolize these, you know, high profile situations like, you know NFL training camp just ended for a lot of people. Right. And there's there's competition between team members to make the team to start and all those things. And we've all probably been a part of groups that had that character to them. But that that, you know, sports are only a good metaphor for other kinds of organizations some of the time.

[00:28:02] Kevin Eikenberry: Yeah, they're only really a good metaphor until they're not.

[00:28:04] Colin Fisher: Yeah. That's right. And that yeah, sports have a lot of things going for them that we don't have an organization. Right. They have these really well defined tasks. They've got, you know, work that almost is inherently already motivating and that when we're in the world of business, usually we're doing stuff that's much more ambiguous and confusing. The tasks aren't that well defined. The scorecard isn't isn't there for us. We can't tell if we're doing well or not as we're doing the work, especially when we're doing something new. And so in those situations, competition is not very helpful that the less well we know what it is we're doing, the less competition's likely to help, because when we get stressed, we tend to do things that are familiar. Our brain actually travels familiar pathways when we have, whether it's good stress or bad stress. And that competition is is kind of a potentially good stressor. But but when we need to make new connections, to learn something new, to be creative or innovative, then these kinds of stressors work against us. They're working against our brain, and they work against our social connections within the group. So the best way to have healthy competition is to benchmark the team against itself, to say, let's compete against ourselves yesterday. Let's do better than we did last week, last month, last year, and that if we're constantly competing against, you know, these past versions of ourselves, that's where we tend to see the healthiest competition. Now, if you if you do have a rival out there in the business world, you know, if you're work at Coke and you're you're against Pepsi and you sort of say, hey, let's be let's be Pepsi, you know, that's not such a terrible thing. But sometimes.

[00:29:51] Kevin Eikenberry: What happens is a lot of times is we end up saying, well, we want to beat the second shift or we want to beat, I mean, all of the conversation we can all have about silos in organizations ultimately end up being putting this, putting the competition in the wrong place by competing against the other departments and and trying to win that way where we're sub optimizing the system.

[00:30:12] Colin Fisher: Right now. Absolutely. And that yeah, you're absolutely right. I've seen especially a lot of big organizations where there's a ton of different metrics and that people are competing for resources, and those resources are more of their everyday experience, that we end up competing absolutely against the wrong, the wrong people. So healthy. If you're if you're managing with competition and trying to motivate people that way, the more you can get us focused on being a better version of ourselves, the better the better off you're going to be.
