Episode: We're Not Getting Sicker — We're Overdiagnosed (People I (Mostly) Admire, Ep. 153)
Show: People I (Mostly) Admire
Guest: Suzanne O'Sullivan, neurologist and author of "The Age of Diagnosis: How Our Obsession with Medical Labels Is Making Us Sicker"
Host: Steve Levitt
Region: Ireland (Suzanne O'Sullivan is an Irish neurologist; she practices in London)
URL: https://freakonomics.com/podcast/were-not-getting-sicker-were-overdiagnosed/
Transcript source: publisher (full transcript published on the episode page)

WHAT WILL BE ASSESSED
Focus on the overdiagnosis half of the conversation, saved in this file, not the
psychosomatic patient stories that open the episode. The three questions draw from
three things. First, what O'Sullivan means by "overdiagnosis," how shifting the
threshold for a disease such as high blood pressure, diabetes, or depression
inflates the count, and the Lyme disease example where the C.D.C. recognized about
63,000 cases but nearly half a million people were being treated. Second, her point
about cancer screening: how a screening program can post wonderful cancer-survival
figures while all-cause mortality does not improve, and why that happens. Third,
what she says about doing more tests, incidental findings, and an A.I. tool reading
a scan without the clinical consultation that gives it meaning. You can skip the
first half about Matthew, Sharon, and resignation syndrome, and skip the closing
listener question about a math documentary.

RANGE USED. The full episode runs roughly 50 minutes. This file contains only the
overdiagnosis section, which is about the last third of the interview, an estimated
18 to 22 minutes of listening.

The publisher transcript carries no timecodes, so those figures are estimated from
speech rate and may be off by a few minutes. Use the spoken lines as the real
markers.

  Start: Steve Levitt, "Yeah, so the main thesis of your book is that we are living
         in a world of overdiagnosis. So what do you mean by overdiagnosis?"
  End:   Suzanne O'Sullivan, "...you make more people better with slow medicine, and
         giving the doctor time."

Everything below is the publisher text for that section, unedited.

---

LEVITT: Yeah, so the main thesis of your book is that we are living in a world of overdiagnosis. So what do you mean by overdiagnosis?

O'SULLIVAN: I think a lot of people think that overdiagnosis is occurring within the field of mental health, and that's the first thing people think about when you talk about overdiagnosis. So that's what I would refer to as kind of overmedicalization, where you are referring to difficulties or struggles that we would once not have considered to be as medical and directing them towards medical attention. So I'm talking about you know, the number of people who've been diagnosed with autism, A.D.H.D., depression, and so forth, that, you know, 20, 30 years ago, perhaps would not have attracted those diagnoses. But I'm not only talking about those mental health conditions. I'm talking about the overdiagnosis and over medicalization of physical parameters too. We have gradually changed the concept of how depressed you have to be to be called "medically depressed" but we've also gradually changed the concept of what it means to have high blood pressure or diabetes, and numerous other diseases like that. Scientists and doctors have been gradually changing the parameters of what counts as disease, and they do this for a really good reason. They do it because they want to miss as few patients that could benefit from help as possible. So it's all done in a well intentioned way. But unfortunately, that trend of gradually loosening diagnostic criteria for both physical health conditions and mental health conditions has led to a sort of diagnosis explosion in numerous sectors of medicine.

LEVITT: I was surprised that in the statistics you report that asthma, of all things, has increased by almost 50 percent when you might have thought it should be the opposite because many of the air quality problems that would have triggered it have been improved by public policy.

O'SULLIVAN: I think that when people think about diagnosis, they think about it as a more definite thing than it actually is. I'm not an expert in asthma, so I don't necessarily want to speak to that in great detail. But, people think, well, if someone says that you have high blood pressure, or someone says you have asthma, or someone says you have diabetes or autism, that's a definite fact based on clear scientific evidence. But first of all, diagnostic criteria are always changing for how much of something you need to have the disease. And then we also have the difficulty of medical tests and how we diagnose things as being highly subjective things. To a certain degree, you can bend tests and you can bend medical criteria to diagnose as many people as you want to. And we are encouraged to do so because underdiagnosing terrifies doctors. They don't want to miss things. Terrifies patients because they don't want to be underdiagnosed. But there's always a grey area in every diagnosis. There's always a grey area where you're not completely sure. And it's very easy to draw a lot of people in the grey area into the diagnostic category.

LEVITT: The most interesting chapter to me was focused on Lyme disease. Could you talk about how Lyme disease is diagnosed?

O'SULLIVAN: This is a really good example because you would think that Lyme disease is a fairly straightforward diagnosis. So obviously people will be aware that Lyme disease is caused by a bacteria and that you catch Lyme disease by a tick bite. And one might assume, therefore, that if you have the bacteria, you must have Lyme disease. And if you don't have the bacteria, you don't have Lyme disease. But Lyme disease is a beautiful example of how subjective diagnosis is both in the clinical symptoms and in the tests. The bacteria that cause Lyme disease are very hard to detect in the blood because there's not loads of them, so you might take a blood test and you're not necessarily going to see a bacteria. So instead what you look for is the immune reaction to the bacteria. So you immediately got a problem because now you're looking at something that is indirect evidence for the disease. And there's lots of things that will affect that indirect evidence. It could be that you have an immune reaction, but it's a really old reaction. You've been living in a Lyme disease area your whole life. You've been exposed to this bacteria lots of times. Or it could be that you're very sick for some other reason. You're producing lots of antibodies and those antibodies cause false positives. So the blood tests that you do for Lyme disease are confounded by multiple different variables. Did you test for the right strain of the bacteria? All of these things can be changed according to how labs configure their tests and how doctors interpret the results of the tests. So the C.D.C. sets out standards for a Lyme disease diagnosis. And I think it was in about 2023, it recognized about 63,000 people had Lyme disease according to the C.D.C. standards. But nearly half a million people were being treated for Lyme disease according to their health records. So it's likely that all of those extra people had a diagnosis that would not be necessarily considered correct according to C.D.C. standards. And that's because medicine is an art, clinically medicine is an art. But also when you look at lab tests, they are subjective and they are open to interpretation.

LEVITT: And in this case, it's really probably about incentives, right? The doctors have a patient, they're sick, they worry about what will happen if they don't treat them for Lyme disease. So they have no idea if they have Lyme disease, but they treat them anyway and hope for the best. In Lyme disease, that's probably why there are so many more people who are told they have Lyme disease than the C.D.C. thinks are true.

O'SULLIVAN: I think it's probably a bit more than that. A difficulty with Lyme disease is that some of the symptoms it produces can be quite vague and they could be symptoms of almost anything; tiredness or a skin rash, for example. So you can imagine how common those symptoms are if you're a family doctor, you're seeing them all the time. And then also there are lots of areas in the U.S. where Lyme disease is quite prevalent. It's perfectly reasonable, therefore, if someone sees a patient in the first instance, they've got vague symptoms, they're in a Lyme disease area to treat them for Lyme disease, even though you're not sure. That's the way doctors practice all the time. However, usually what we'll do as doctors in that circumstance is we'll try the treatment, see how it works. If it's not working, then we'll stop the treatment. That's not what happens with Lyme disease. Unfortunately, a condition called chronic Lyme disease has taken hold of the Lyme disease community and is being, I would say, exploited. There is a very standard treatment for Lyme disease as laid out by the C.D.C. But there are a lot of people who are attending private doctors who get antibiotics for many years, even though the signs are not felt to fit very well with Lyme disease.

LEVITT: And one of the reasons why overdiagnosis would be problematic would be if there's a psychosomatic component that kicks in when you're led to believe that you have Lyme disease. Do you think there is a big psychosomatic component of chronic Lyme disease?

O'SULLIVAN: I would be quite sure that a percentage of people — I spoke to this very nice lady from Wales in the U.K. who suffered a kind of flu-like illness while she was on a holiday. She did not live in a Lyme disease area and she was on holiday in a city. There was no reason for her to contract Lyme disease. And she developed flu-like symptoms that didn't go away. And then within a couple of weeks she had 90 to 100 different symptoms, and this progressed to the point that she was too tired to leave her house. Now, if you've got 90 to 100 symptoms, you're bound to have a couple of symptoms in there that fit with Lyme disease. And after she saw a television program about Lyme disease, she developed the conviction that this was her diagnosis. I would say that people in her situation, I would certainly say there's a large psychosomatic element. The belief in the diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease is very problematic because people get dependent on long-term antibiotics, and the belief that they won't get better. And if you believe you won't get better, then it's very difficult to get better.

LEVITT: So, I started this conversation by suggesting that I thought that this book would make people mad. Now I'm going to ask you about long Covid and see how many people with long Covid you can offend because you are a real skeptic with respect to long Covid. Is that true?

O'SULLIVAN: First thing I want to say is that there should be nothing offensive in my view at all here, because my position always with these disorders is that people are suffering. Symptoms are real, but it's how people conceptualize what's causing those symptoms that I think is a problem. And it's also the perception. So if I'm about to say that I believe long Covid for a lot of people is psychosomatic, that should not be seen as in any way lessening their suffering or saying that they are not suffering or saying that they do not need help. I'm merely saying that the mechanism of illness according to the evidence and according to my view, fits better with psychosomatic illness. But with regard to long Covid, I mean, it came about in a very unconventional way. The term arose on the 20th of May, 2020, when it was tweeted by an Italian person who was suffering with long term symptoms after contracting Covid. It very quickly took off in social media. There were people who were not hospitalized, who had a more mild form of Covid, who didn't seem to be getting better quickly enough, and they banded together on social media under the hashtag long Covid, and found support in each other that way. The difficulty was that long Covid then spread very quickly to the mainstream media into the mouths of government officials who were telling us every day not only could we die and we might end up in hospital, but even if we got a minor illness, we could get this thing called long Covid. But there was no definition for long Covid. There was no specific symptoms that told you what it was. There was no test that proved what it was. So it was a name that could explain any type of suffering during the pandemic in those early stages. It quickly spread to medical journals. And that science just moved too quickly to be really accurate or meaningful. And for some people, it was being referred to as long Covid, and for others, it was probably given different names. There's a few pieces of evidence that really support the psychosomatic theory. More than one study has shown that loneliness was a predictor for long Covid. There was a study in Germany where they followed healthcare workers, and people who had an expectation of symptom severity were more likely to get long Covid. So people who expected to get it got it. There was another study in which they showed that self diagnosis was more likely to lead to long Covid than an official diagnosis of Covid infection. Obviously people were suffering in the pandemic. They were suffering psychologically. Their diets changed. They stopped exercising. Everything about their body changed. And here was a diagnostic explanation for it. So I really feel that long Covid drew in lots of people who were suffering in lots of different ways under this umbrella. But I really don't think people should feel that means the suffering isn't real. Again, it's an intelligible way of asking for help at a time that you need help. And perhaps what we should learn from it is that we need better support systems for people that don't rely upon a medical diagnosis.

LEVITT: Yeah, it's really true, right? In modern society, if you want to get help, you need a medical diagnosis. You can't get access to a lot of the support you might want if a doctor hasn't signed off and says you need it. It seems like that's just a fundamental problem with the way we've organized society. Would you agree?

O'SULLIVAN: A hundred percent. Particularly for some of the mental health disorders or learning disorders, problems like autism, A.D.H.D., depression, et cetera. First of all, in schools, your child is struggling in school. You want to pay attention to that struggling and try and get them extra support. The only way to get that very often is through a diagnosis, or the only way for the school to justify extra staff is through a diagnosis. And similarly, outside of schools for older people, illness gives you a pathway to ask for help and it also makes you part of a community of other people who are suffering. It makes a lot of sense for distress to be conceptualized under a medical label. But my concern really is what happens after that? When you label people, you change how they see themselves, and you change how they are seen by others, and that can affect their future, either as a child or as an adult. And that's the thing I want people to realize when they're thinking, "Well, you know, my child, I don't know, they're on the borderline. Perhaps I notice social difficulties, perhaps a diagnosis of autism will get them extra help in school that will propel them forward." But what else comes with that? Will that child feel that they have a brain abnormality they cannot overcome and change their future in that way? Will other people think that there's something wrong with them? So I think we need to talk more about diagnosis is not inert. We don't talk enough about the negative implications of a diagnosis.

* * *

One of the most popular podcast episodes I ever did was with physician Peter Attia, who espouses something he calls medicine 3.0. It's a more proactive approach to medicine that focuses on preventing diseases like diabetes and heart disease and cancer. But some of the points in Suzanne O'Sullivan's latest book, The Age of Diagnosis, seem to challenge aspects of Peter's thinking. I asked her opinion on medicine 3.0.

O'SULLIVAN: The minute you said medicine 3.0, I thought I probably was not going to agree with this doctor. I think prevention, absolutely. This is where you put your attention. If I use cancer as an example, there's a lot of things we can do to prevent cancer; lose weight, stop smoking, eat a healthier diet, exercise, et cetera. These are the things we should pay attention to. But we have this assumption in medicine and in society, and this may be the sort of medicine 3.0 angle, which is that let's just search for those cancers and get them at the earliest possible stage. And if we do that, we will be able to treat people more effectively and we will save lives. And that makes so much sense in one's head. And that's the basis for screening that we've all been doing for many years. But actually, time and time again, with screening programs for health, be it screening for cancer, be it screening for high blood pressure, we find that the maths isn't adding up. So actually, most prostate cancer screening programs are no longer mandatory in most countries because what they discovered is that when you screen people for cancer, you find lots of early cancer cells and you treat those people, but just as many people are dying of prostate cancer. Our tests are so good now that if you look hard enough for a disease, you will find all these little early cancer cells and we don't know yet how to distinguish the person who will get the advanced stage cancer, who will die of it, and the person in whom the cancer will never advance. So this sort of thirst for doing more tests and finding it earlier is proving to probably treat a lot of people who don't need to be treated.

LEVITT: I was talking recently to a doctor who treats patients with prostate cancer. He said in his view the best treatment strategy for most prostate cancers is just to watch and wait. And that's the advice that he gives to most of his patients. But he says they almost never follow his advice in this regard. Because once they know they have cancer, even without any symptoms, they want it gone. And so they opt for immediate radiation or surgery, and that's an interesting case where I've assumed as we've been talking about overdiagnosis and over-medicalization that it's maybe the fault of the medical profession, but here's an example I think where it's actually society and the way people perceive the word cancer that leads the patients to be driving treatment rather than the doctors.

O'SULLIVAN: There is an argument to say that some of these early cancer cells that we're finding on very sophisticated tests should probably just be given a different name. For precisely the reason you were saying. There are watchful waiting programs. This has been a huge problem for breast cancer also. Most women really would be too terrified to enter a watchful waiting program. But the truth is that that treatment that they get can foreshorten their lives in other ways. So again, it's not a matter of you get the treatment, "Oh thank God it's gone.That's the end of that." You've had treatment that can affect your health negatively. And the outcome of that is if you look at a screening program and you look at how many people on that screening program died from cancer, it looks really successful because if you diagnose lots of cancers that never needed to be diagnosed and then you treat them and everyone survives, you'll get wonderful figures in which everyone seems to be doing really well. If you look at all-cause mortality, so if you look at people dying for any reason, you'll find that the cancer screening program has not resulted in any improvement in deaths. And that's because you are saving one life from dying of cancer, but you're probably negatively affecting another life with the treatment for cancer. And I think people need to understand these controversies are very open within the medical world.

LEVITT: What's your vision? How should society and medicine interact?

O'SULLIVAN: So I really think we need to place more value and more investment in the clinical side of medicine. You get the most accurate diagnosis if you have a few different quality consultations with your doctor who lays hands on you and therefore can really understand the problem that you're bringing to them, and then interpret the tests in light of that understanding. So I think at the moment we're really heading more in the direction of saying, maybe this A.I. tool will diagnose millions of cancers much faster than a radiologist. But actually it'll be nothing without that consultation that makes sense of what that scan is finding for the clinical context of the patient. It's all about the patient and doctor or nurse interaction. And I think we need to start prioritizing that over technology.

LEVITT: So in the U.S., at least, I think every trend goes in the opposite direction, right? Doctors spend so little time with patients, they have such high caseloads that they don't have time to sit down and to hear the patient because there's seven other patients waiting in line.

O'SULLIVAN: Yeah, it's a huge problem in the U.K. Very often general practitioners only have five minutes with their patients. How can you really get to the kind of nub of the problem? And that's why doing tests and putting a medical label on something is often the easiest consultation for a doctor. Someone comes to me with a headache and they're worried they have a brain tumor. Doing a scan to assure them they don't have a brain tumor is the easiest thing I can do. It takes a few minutes. Explaining why doing the scan, A. it isn't necessary, B. it could be harmful because it'll pick up all sorts of incidental findings that will just add to the anxiety — that's a 20-minute consultation. You know, if we go back to the example of chronic Lyme disease and I was talking about a lady called Shan, who had chronic Lyme disease, she saw lots of private doctors and I would say that there was some real charlatans amongst that group who charge her large amounts of money for very unconventional treatment that most doctors wouldn't agree with. She loved those doctors. And I would say what was at the heart of that was that what she was really paying for was to be heard. These doctors spent time with her. They examined her. They listened to her and they wanted to meet her again. That's what was sustaining her. And I think we in more conventional side of medicine do need to learn from that. We need to understand that you make more people better with slow medicine, and giving the doctor time.
